Clarify "expectations" without splitting into two terms (#795)
slsa-framework/slsa: docs/spec/v1.0/verifying-artifacts.md

This page is divided into several sections. The first describes the procedure
for verifying an artifact and its provenance against a set of expectations. The
second describes how to form the expectations used to verify provenance. The
third discusses choices software distribution and/or deployment system

> implementers must make regarding verifying provenance.

Reviewer: How does a "software distribution and/or deployment system" differ from the already established term "package ecosystem"?

Reviewer 2: The following takes the wording from #789:

```suggestion
third discusses architecture choices for where provenance verification can
happen.
```

[verify-step-2]: #check-expectations

Next, check that the package's provenance meets your expectations for that
package in order to mitigate [threat "C"].

In our threat model, the adversary has ability to invoke a build and to publish

> to the registry. The adversary is not to write to the source repository, nor do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the registry. The adversary is not able to write to the source repository, nor do
```

repositories. That mapping constitutes a set of expectations. The package
ecosystem tooling compares a package's provenance to those expectations during
upload to ensure all packages in the ecosystem are built from their canonical
source repository, which indicates their authenticity.

Possible models for forming expectations include:

-   **Trust on first use:** Accept the first version of the package as-is. On
    each version update, compare the old provenance to the new provenance and
    alert on any differences. This can be augmented by having rules about what
    changes are benign, such as a parameter known to be safe or a heuristic
    about safe git branches or tags.

-   **Defined by producer:** The package producer tells the verifier what their
    expectations should be. In this model, the verifier SHOULD provide an
    authenticated communication mechanism for the producer to set the package's
    expectations, and there SHOULD be some protection against an adversary
    unilaterally modifying them. For example, modifications may require
    two-party control, or consumers may have to accept each policy change
    (another form of trust on first use).

> -   **Defined in source:** The source repository tells the verifier what their
>     expectations should be. In this model, the package name is immutably bound
>     to a source repository and all other external parameters are defined in the
>     source repository. This is how the Go ecosystem  works, for example, since
>     the package name *is* the source repository location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   **Defined in source:** The source repository tells the verifier what their
    expectations ought to be. In this model, the package name is immutably bound
    to a source repository and all other external parameters are defined in the
    source repository. This is how the Go ecosystem  works, for example, since
    the package name *is* the source repository location.
```

It is important to note that expectations are tied to a *package name*, whereas
provenance is tied to an *artifact*. Different versions of the same package name

> may have different artifacts and therefore different provenance. Similarly, an
> artifact may have different names in different package ecosystems but use the same
> provenance file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will likely have different artifacts and therefore different provenance. Similarly, an
artifact might have different names in different package ecosystems but use the same
provenance file.
```

## Architecture options

System implementers decide which part(s) of the system will verify provenance:
the package ecosystem at upload time, the consumers at download time, or via a
continuous monitoring system. Each option comes with its own set of
considerations, but all are valid. The options are not mutually exclusive, but
at least one part of a SLSA-conformant system SHOULD verify provenance.

More than one component can verify provenance. For example, if a package
ecosystem verifies provenance, then consumers who get artifacts from that
package ecosystem do not have to verify provenance. Consumers can do so with
client-side verification tooling or by polling a monitor, but there is no

> requirement that they do so.

Reviewer 2: nit: This paragraph seems inconsistent. It starts out suggesting that more than one thing can do it, then it talks about how you don't really have to do it more than once. It would be nice to align the wording.

Author: Done

[Threat "E"]: /spec/v1.0/threats#e-use-compromised-dependency
[VSA]: /verification_summary
[threats]: /spec/v1.0/threats

## Forming Expectations

<dfn>Expectations</dfn> are known provenance values that indicate the
corresponding artifact is authentic. For example, a package ecosystem may
maintain a mapping between package names and their canonical source
repositories. That mapping constitutes a set of expectations. The package
ecosystem tooling compares a package's provenance to those expectations during
upload to ensure all packages in the ecosystem are built from their canonical

> source repo, which indicates their authenticity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
source repository, which indicates their authenticity.
```

Possible models for forming expectations include:

-   **Trust on first use:** Accept the first version of the package as-is. On
    each version update, compare the old provenance to the new provenance and
    alert on any differences. This can be augmented by having rules about what
    changes are benign, such as a parameter known to be safe or a heuristic

>     about safe git refs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    about safe Git References.
```
Is it worth including a link, i.e. https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Internals-Git-References ?

Reviewer 2: I think the following would be easier to understand without a need for a link:

```suggestion
    about safe git branches or tags.
```

-   **Defined by producer:** The package producer tells the verifier what their
    expectations should be. In this model, the verifier MUST provide an
    authenticated communication mechanism for the producer to set the package's
    expectations, and there MUST be some protection against an adversary
    unilaterally modifying them. For example, modifications may require
    two-party control, or consumers may have to accept each policy change
    (another form of trust on first use).

-   **Defined in source:** The source repository tells the verifier what their

>     expectations should be . In this model, the package name is immutably bound

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    expectations should be. In this model, the package name is immutably bound
```

    to a source repository and all other external parameters are defined in the
    source repository. This is how the Go ecosystem  works, for example, since
    the package name *is* the source repository location.

It is important to note that expectations are tied to a *package name*, whereas
provenance is tied to an *artifact*. Different versions of the same package name
may have different artifacts and therefore different provenance. Similarly, an
artifact may have different names in different package ecosystems but use the same
provenance file.

## Architecture options

System implementers decide which part(s) of the system will verify provenance:
the package ecosystem at upload time, the consumers at download time, or via a
continuous monitoring system. Each option comes with its own set of
considerations, but all are valid. The options are not mutually exclusive, but

> at least one part of a SLSA-conformant system must verify provenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at least one part of a SLSA-conformant system should verify provenance.
```
per the discussion in the specification meeting yesterday (2023-03-03) and to match #789

Reviewer 3: Well, this got to be capitalized:
```suggestion
at least one part of a SLSA-conformant system SHOULD verify provenance.
```

distribution (e.g. [OCI](https://github.com/opencontainers/distribution-spec)).
Other ecosystems are informal, such as a convention used within a company. Even
ad-hoc distribution of software, such as through a link on a website, is
considered an "ecosystem". For more background, see
[Package Model](terminology.md#package-model).

During package upload, a package ecosystem can ensure that the artifact's
provenance matches the expected values for that package name's provenance before
accepting it into the package registry.  If possible, system implementers SHOULD
prefer this option because doing so benefits all of the package ecosystem's
clients.

The package ecosystem is responsible for making its expectations available to
consumers, reliably redistributing artifacts and provenance, and providing tools
to enable safe artifact consumption (e.g. whether an artifact meets
expectations).

### Consumer

[Consumer]: #consumer

A package artifact's <dfn>consumer</dfn> is the organization or individual that uses the
package artifact.

Consumers can form their own expectations for artifacts or use the default
expectations provided by the package producer and/or package ecosystem.

> In this situation, the consumer uses client-side verification tooling to ensure

Reviewer: The previous sentence describes two situations. Perhaps something like: 
```suggestion
When forming their own expectations, the consumer uses client-side verification tooling to ensure
```
